macOS Installation:
  brew install git (Installs Git using the Homebrew package manager (recommended for Mac) [1]).
  git --version (Prompts macOS to trigger the automatic installation of Apple Command Line Developer Tools if Git is missing).
  
Linux Installation:
    sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install git (Updates packages and installs Git on Ubuntu, Debian, Mint, and Pop!_OS [1]).
    sudo dnf install git (Installs Git on Fedora, Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL), and CentOS [1]).
    sudo pacman -S git (Installs Git on Arch Linux and Manjaro.sudo zypper install git — Installs Git on OpenSUSE).
    
Windows alternative (via Winget):
    While Windows users typically use the graphical installer from the official website [1], you can install it via the command prompt using this command:
        winget install --id Git.Git -e --source winget 
        (Downloads and runs the official Git for Windows installer directly from your terminal).


1. What is Git?  
   At its core, Git is a Distributed Version Control System (DVCS).

   Version Control System: It keeps track of the history of your files. If you break your code, you can roll it back to a time when it worked perfectly.

   Distributed: Every developer has a full copy of the entire project history on their local machine, not just a central server. If the main server goes down, any developer's local repository can be used to restore it.

2.Git vs. GitHub
  Git is the actual software/tool that runs locally on your computer to track changes.

  GitHub (or GitLab, Bitbucket) is a cloud-based hosting service that stores your Git repositories online so you can share and collaborate with others.

3.The Three Stages of Git
  When you modify files, they pass through three distinct areas before being safely recorded in your history:

    1.Working Directory: The actual files you are currently editing on your computer.

    2.Staging Area (Index): A preparation zone. You choose which specific changes you want to include in your next snapshot.

    3.Local Repository: The .git folder where Git permanently saves the snapshots (commits) of your project.

4. Setting Up Git
    Before you start tracking files, you need to configure your identity so your commits are properly credited to you.

    1.Configure your name: git config --global user.name "Your Name"
    2.Configure your email: git config --global user.email "your.email@example.com"

    3.Initialize a new local repository: git init (Run this inside your project folder to start tracking it with Git)

    4. Tracking Changes (The Core Workflow)
        Working Directory  ──( git add )──>  Staging Area  ──( git commit )──>  Local Repo

    5.Check repository status: git status (See which files are modified, untracked, or staged)

    6.Stage a specific file: git add filename.txt (Moves a file from the Working Directory to the Staging Area)
    or
    Stage all changes:git add . (Stages every modified and new file in the current directory)

    7.Commit your changes: git commit -m "Your descriptive commit message here" (Permanently saves your staged snapshot into your local history)
    The -m flag stands for message.
    Why Use -m?
    Saves time: You write the message directly in your terminal.
    Avoids editors: You do not get trapped in command-line editors like Vim or Nano.
    Streamlines workflow: Ideal for quick, one-line summaries of your code changes.

5. Reviewing History and Differences
  Tools to help you see what has changed over time.
    1.View commit history: git log (Shows a list of all past commits, authors, and dates)
    2.View a compact commit history:git log --oneline (Condenses the history to one line per commit)

    3.View unstaged changes: git diff (Shows the exact line-by-line differences between your working directory and your last commit)

6.Undoing Mistakes
  If you make a mistake before permanently committing it, use these to back up.

  1.Unstage a file: git reset filename.txt (Removes a file from the Staging Area back to the Working Directory, keeping your changes intact)
  2.Discard local changes in a file: git checkout -- filename.txt (Wipes away changes made to a file since the last commit—use carefully!)

7.Working with Remote Repositories (e.g., GitHub)
 Commands used to sync your local code with an online platform.
   1.Link a local repo to a remote server:
      git remote add origin https://github.com/username/repository-name.git
        
        git remote add: Tells Git you want to track a new external repository.
        origin: The default nickname Git uses for your primary central server.
        https://...: The exact internet address where your online backup lives.

    2.Rename your main branch (Recommended standard): git branch -M main
   
   2.Push changes for the first time: (Sends your local commits to the online server and sets the default tracking branch)
         git push -u origin main

    git push: Copies your local repository commits to the remote server.
    -u: Sets the upstream tracking link. This links your local main branch to the remote main branch permanently.
    origin: The nickname of the remote server you connected in the previous step.
    main: The name of the specific branch you are uploading.

    Why the -u Flag Matters:
      You only need to use the -u flag the very first time you push this branch.
      Because Git now remembers this link, every future update requires you to type just two words: git push

The Complete First-Time Setup Sequence
    # 1. Initialize a brand new local Git repository
    git init

    # 2. Stage all your project files for tracking
    git add .

    # 3. Save your staged files locally with a descriptive message (-m)
    git commit -m "Initial commit"

    # 4. Ensure your default branch is named 'main'
    git branch -M main

    # 5. Link your local project to your online GitHub repository
    git remote add origin https://github.com

    # 6. Upload your code online and set the upstream link (-u)
    git push -u origin main

8.Download/Clone an existing online project:
   git clone https://github.com/username/repository-name.git




Repository Initialization:
   command:
    git init (Initializes a brand new local Git repository inside your current folder).
    git clone <url> — Downloads an existing repository and its entire history from a remote server.
    
Tracking & Staging Changes:
   command:
    git status (Displays modified, staged, or untracked files in your active workspace).
    git add <file> (Stages a specific file, preparing it for your next snapshot).
    git add . (Stages all new, modified, and deleted files in the current folder).
    git commit -m "message" (Saves all currently staged changes to your permanent local history).

Inspection & History Logs:
  command:
   git log (Shows the full, chronological commit history with author and date metadata).
   git log --oneline ( Compresses the history timeline into clean, single-line entries).
   git log --oneline --graph --all (Displays a visual tree structure of all branches and merges).
   git diff (Shows line-by-line code changes made to files that have not yet been staged).
   git diff --staged (Shows line-by-line changes for files that are already staged).

Branching Operations:
  command:
   git branch (Lists all local branches (the active branch is marked with an asterisk *)).
   git branch -a (Lists all local and remote-tracking branches available).
   git branch <name> (Creates a new branch pointer referencing your current commit).
   git switch <name> (Switches your working context to the targeted branch).
   git switch -c <name> (Creates a brand new branch and switches to it instantly).
   git branch -d <name> (Deletes a branch that has already been safely merged).
   git branch -D <name> (Forces the deletion of an unmerged branch, discarding its changes).

Merging, Rebasing, & Syncing:
  command:
    git merge <name> (Integrates changes from the targeted branch into your active branch).
    git rebase <branch> (Re-applies your current branch's commits on top of another branch tip).
    git cherry-pick <hash> (Copies a single specific commit from any branch onto your current branch).
    git remote add origin <url> (Links your local repository to a remote server like GitHub).
    git remote -v  (Displays the remote URLs currently connected to your local workspace).
    git remote set-url origin <url> (Replaces an existing remote server URL with a new one).
    git push -u origin <branch> (Uploads local commits to a remote server and sets upstream tracking).
    git push (Uploads subsequent local commits once upstream tracking is already configured)
    git fetch (Downloads tracking updates from the remote server without altering your local files).
    git pull (Downloads and immediately integrates remote updates into your active branch files).

Stashing (Temporary Storage):
  command:
   git stash (Temporarily clears your working modifications and saves them on an internal clipboard).
   git stash -u (Stashes your current modifications along with any brand new, untracked files).
   git stash list (Displays all saved stashes in your current project repository).
   git stash pop (Restores your most recently stashed code changes and removes them from the clipboard).
   git stash apply (Restores stashed changes but keeps a copy saved in your clipboard history).
   git stash drop <id> (Permanently deletes a specific stash identifier from your history tracker).

Error Fixing & Undo Operations:
   command:
    git restore --staged <file> (Unstages a file, moving it back out of your staging area).
    git commit --amend -m "msg" (Modifies your very last commit message or updates it with newly staged files).
    git reset --soft HEAD~1  (Undoes your last commit while keeping your code files completely staged).
    git reset (Clears your staging area completely without modifying any of your source code files).
    git reset --hard HEAD~1 (Permanently destroys your last commit and all changes made in it).


